**Artefacts** By-products created during software development that help
describe functions, architecture, design and commissioning; for example:
functional requirements, description of databases and processes, the
test set.

**Code Hosting (tool)** A platform that allows for the publication of
the source code, organised into multiple repositories. Code hosting
tools often also offer functionalities related to software evolution
such as ticketing systems, processes for third-party code contribution,
an area for downloading releases, etc. Within the framework of these
guidelines, the tools chosen by the administrations must have minimum
requirements in terms of functionality (`3.4.1 Identifying a code
hosting tool <#_Toc535583350>`__).

**Source code** The source code (often referred to simply as 'source')
is the text of a program written in a programming language (e.g. C or
Visual Basic) from which the final program used by the user is derived.
Access to the source code is essential for modifying a program.

**Community** Aggregation of natural and legal persons and resources
(e.g. forums, chatrooms and technologies for meeting and interacting in
a virtual location), with rules and a structure, aimed at the
implementation and/or management of a common project.

**Open format (data)** The public data format, versioned,
comprehensively documented and without restrictions at implementation.
An open format is a format recognised by a standardisation body and
maintained in a shared manner among multiple bodies that provide
concurrent implementations, with a transparent process. The format must
remain consistent with the affirmed version.

**Data format** Data representation method.

**Interoperability** In the field of information technology, the
capacity of different and autonomous systems to cooperate and exchange
information automatically, on the basis of shared rules.

**Licence** In the field of information technology, the legal text with
which certain rights are granted to the software and the data
distributed, which would otherwise be reserved by exclusivity rights.

**Lock-in** A technical and economic phenomenon in which a generic user
is unable to free themselves from a previously made technological
choice. This inability is typically caused by the high costs of changing
technology but, in many cases, it may also depend on the adoption of
proprietary solutions that prevent migration. The use of open formats
for data storage, and free access to such data (especially in the case
of SaaS solutions) are prerequisites for avoiding lock-in situations.

**Open source** This refers to a method in which software can be
licensed. It is implemented by granting the public rights to use, copy,
modify and distribute copies, including modified copies, of the
software; to do this, the source code must also be freely available.
Also referred to as 'free software', 'open software' or 'software
released under open license'. The certification body for software
licences corresponding to this definition is the Open Source Initiative
(OSI).

**Repository** Within a code hosting tool, a repository is the minimum
containment unit for the source code of a piece of software. The term
'reportorio' is its Italian translation (used for example in CAD
Article 69(1)).

**Reuse** In the context of these guidelines, this refers to the process
outlined by the CAD (Article 69) with which an administration
distributes ('making available for reuse') software that it owns in open
source, for the benefit of other administrations that can use it
('reusing'). All reusable software is open source, but not all open
source software is reusable (since not all open source software is owned
by an administration).

**SaaS** Software as a Service. Refers to a method of software
distribution that does not involve installation on operators'
workstations, but that occurs through remote access to a server, for
example by connecting to an address through a browser. Wikipedia is an
example of software distributed in Software as a Service mode.

**Proprietary software** This is software that has restrictions on its
use, modification, reproduction or redistribution imposed by the owner
of the economic exploitation rights, i.e. the author or - in the event
of a transfer of proprietary rights - the assignee of the rights in
question.

**TCO** Total Cost of Ownership: Approach used to assess all the costs
of the life cycle of an IT resource calculated over a time window
appropriate to the context of the assessment and that includes the cost
of migration to another solution (e.g. acquisition, installation,
management, maintenance and decommissioning). The TCO approach is based
on the consideration that the total cost of using an IT resource depends
not only on the acquisition costs, but also on all the costs that occur
during the entire operating life of the resource itself.
