Ownership
-----------------

In accordance with Article 69 of the CAD, as regards reuse, an
administration is to be considered as the owner of software designed to
meet its own specifications whenever:

-  it has commissioned such a solution - by means of procurement or
   other negotiation circumstances of a similar nature, regardless of
   the title given to the contract - and **the contract provides for the
   acquisition of all intellectual and industrial property rights** over
   the software developed on behalf of the public administration, or in
   any case does not attribute such ownership to the contractor or to
   third parties.

-  the software was developed by resources within the administration
   itself.

When negotiating a contract to commission the development of software,
each administration must ensure, at the conclusion of the execution of
the contract, their full and exclusive ownership of all rights over the
software under development, unless this is excessively onerous for
proven technical and economic reasons (from Article 69(2) of the CAD).

Software under development refers to the parts of software actually
developed in execution of the contract; it is understood that
development could be based on the use of existing software components
(e.g. open source libraries and frameworks of third parties) for which
acquiring ownership is not necessary, only a licence is required (which
must be compatible with the purposes of reuse).

Failure to acquire ownership of the work cannot be used to obtain more
advantageous economic conditions, since it does not constitute a proven
technical-economic reason within the meaning of Article 69(2) of the
CAD.

An administration, within the meaning of Article 69, must also acquire
all intellectual and industrial property rights to any customisations or
software modules intended to be integrated with or interfaced with
proprietary software. In this case, the obligation set forth in
Article 69 shall apply exclusively to the module or part of the software
being developed; this module must therefore be separated from the rest
of the software and released in accordance with the methods specified in `Development of software from scratch 
<https://docs-italia-staging.teamdigitale.it/italia/developers-italia/lg-acquisizione-e-riuso-software-per-pa-docs-en/it/new-version-master/software-reuse/development-of-software-from-scratch.html/>`_, taking care to specify the required ownership dependency within the documentation.

For example, wording such as the following, where present in software
development contracts, allows for the administration to be deemed to be
the owner of the rights in the sense required by Article 69 of the CAD:

-  'the client will own the developed software';

-  'the ownership of the IT solution covered by the contract will be
   attached to the client or administration';

-  'at the end of the contract, the intellectual property of the IT
   solution under development will lie within the competence of the
   awarding administration';

-  'all copyrights on the developed software will be transferred, after
   the completion of the work, to the awarding administration, which
   will become the owner';

-  'all economic exploitation rights as regards the contracted software
   shall lie within the competence of the awarding administration'.
