Purpose and structure of the document
---------------------------------------------

These guidelines are adopted in implementing Articles 68 and 69 of the
*Digital Administration Code* (hereinafter CAD):

-  as provided for in Article 68(1b), identifying in Chapter \ `2
   Guidelines for acquiring software <#_bookmark8>`__, the methods and
   criteria by which an administration must carry out the comparative
   assessment described in the aforementioned article when selecting a
   method for acquiring software.

-  as provided for in Article 69(2\ *a*), identifying in Chapter \ `3
   Guidelines for software reuse (Article 69) <#_bookmark38>`__, the
   platform for the publication of source code under open licence and
   software documentation available for reuse by administrations,
   specifying the technical methods for use.

They also replace the previous Circular 63/2013, entitled *‘Guidelines
for comparative assessment provided for by Article 68 of Legislative
Decree No 82 of 7 March 2005, the Digital Administration Code’* and its
annexes.

This document and the methodology described within are to be understood
as aids to a decision-making process that remains under the full
responsibility of administrations, when they share solutions as well as
when they adopt them for reuse in compliance with the regulations in
force, in particular with regard to digital public administration,
public contracts and the protection of personal data. With reference to
the latter area of law, EU Regulation 2016/679 has defined/specified
principles and criteria that are particularly relevant with respect to
the subject matter of these guidelines. Among these principles and
criteria, the requirement to consider data protection from the design
stage and by default (Article 25 of the aforementioned regulation) is
highlighted. Furthermore, attention should be paid to AgID technical
rules that may affect the subject matter, such as the `Minimum
security <https://www.agid.gov.it/index.php/it/sicurezza/misure-minime-sicurezza-ict>`__
`measures
(Circular 2/2017) <https://www.agid.gov.it/index.php/it/sicurezza/misure-minime-sicurezza-ict>`__
and `Guidelines for the development of secure
software <http://www.agid.gov.it/sites/default/files/repository_files/documentazione/linee_guida_per_lo_sviluppo_sicuro_di_codice_v1.0.pdf>`__.

This document is the starting point of a cultural process in which
public administrations are the protagonists for the increasing use of
open software, as is evident from Article 69(1), which requires public
administrations ‘that own solutions and computer programs created at the
specific instructions of the public client’ to ‘make the relevant source
code available, complete with documentation and released in a public
repository **under open licence**. **. .** ‘

Therefore, the aforementioned regulation was the starting point for the
preparation of these *guidelines*, highlighting the vigorous drive of
the legislator towards the increasing use of open source software by
public administrations. This can be seen from the simultaneous
elimination of the provision of the so-called ‘reuse catalogue’, without
this preventing, if necessary, public administrations from entering into
agreements (for example, on the basis of Article 15 of Law No 241/90)
for the reuse of solutions that do not comply with the provisions of
Article 69(1) and that cannot fall within the scope of the cases dealt
with here, which, it is stressed, must be those that are subject to an
open licence.

In any case, the legislator, adopting this strong propensity towards
open source for public administrations, has reasonably provided for a
**general exclusion, only for ‘justified reasons of public order and
safety, national defence and electoral consultations’** - in
Article 69(1), final bullet point - , in order to safeguard those more
sensitive areas of digital government of the country, which from the
sharing and community management of open software may be exposed to
risk.

The approach described above, which favours open source, can also be
inferred clearly from the wording of Article 69(2), which requires
public administrations ‘in project specifications’ to ‘always be the
owners of all rights to programs and information and communication
technology services, specifically developed for them’.

A safeguard has also been provided for in this case, uniquely for
circumstances in which 'this is excessively onerous for proven
technical-economic reasons'.

Consequently, Article 68 shall be understood and implemented in this
document, in full compliance with the aforementioned interpretation of
Article 69.

Public administrations are in the position to best know their
requirements and will be capable of rejecting the methodology proposed
here, in relation to its context, as well as to the characteristics of
the acquisition to be carried out.

In this sense, the *guidelines* are not merely a regulatory tool, but
suggestions for new follow-up, awareness and information processes.
