Subjects of the guidelines
-------------------------------------

These guidelines are addressed to public administrations referred to in
Article 1(2) of Legislative Decree No 165 of 30 March 2001, in
compliance with the division of competence referred to in Article 117 of
the Constitution, including the port system authorities, as well as the
independent administrative authorities of assurance, control and
regulation, i.e. '*institutes and schools of any class and grade, and
educational institutions, autonomous state companies and
administrations, the regions, provinces, municipalities and mountain
communities and their consortia and associations, university
institutions, autonomous social housing institutes, chambers of
commerce, industry, crafts and agriculture and their associations, all
non-profit national, regional and local public bodies, administrations,
companies and bodies of the national health service, ARAN (l’Agenzia per
la rappresentanza negoziale delle pubbliche amministrazioni -
Contractual Representation Agency for Public Administrations) and the
agencies cited in Legislative Decree No 300 of 30 July 1999 and CONI
(Comitato Olimpico Nazionale Italiano - Italian National Olympic
Committee) (for the latter administration, up until the organic review
of the regulations for the sector)'*.

The provisions for the reuse of solutions shall not apply where there
are 'justified reasons concerning public order and safety, national
security and defence, and electoral consultations'.

With reference to the scope of application of these guidelines, it is
hoped that public administrations will use the cooperation and
collaboration tools provided by current legislation, such as
collaboration agreements provided for by Article 15 of Law No 241/1990,
in order to implement co-design initiatives, broadening the sharing of
knowledge, decision-making processes and common paths, through, for
example, centres of expertise and support throughout the life cycle of
the software.
