Development of software from scratch
--------------------------------------

If the administration, following the comparative assessment proposed in
`2. Guidelines for acquiring software <#_bookmark8>`__, chooses to
develop software from scratch using internal resources or through
procurement, it is important to comply with the provisions of
Article 69, and in particular:

-  paragraph 1, which requires release under an open licence to allow
   for reuse by other administrations;

-  paragraph 2, which requires the administration to acquire ownership
   of the software being developed;

-  paragraph 2a, which confers the choice of platforms for the
   publication of the source code to these guidelines.

The following sections explore how to comply with the above provisions.

Releasing new software under open licence
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is important that Article 69(1), which requires release under open
licence, is considered from the outset of development and not only at
the end of the entire process. The technical requirements for release
are described in `Annex A: Guide to publishing software as open
source <#_bookmark65>`__.

The costs incurred in carrying out the work described in the guide will
be significantly lower if the technical specifications described are
followed from the outset of development.

In the case of procurement, it is **essential that the authorities
always include** `Annex A: Guide to the <#_bookmark65>`__\ `publication
of software as open source <#_bookmark65>`__ **among the tender
documents,** for example, in an annex to the technical specifications.

Conversely, if the administration were to be late in complying with
Article 69(1), using a tender procedure subsequent to the completion of
the former, it would incur additional economic costs.

Therefore, it is recommended to develop the software directly on the
selected code hosting tool, from the early stages of design, without
waiting for the preliminary version to implement the release.

Acquisition of ownership of software developed from scratch
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As already discussed in `1.5 Ownership <#_Toc535583316>`__, the
administration must ensure full ownership of software created from
scratch. Please refer to the aforementioned section for further
information.
