Maintenance of software by the owner administration
----------------------------------------------------

Software maintenance, whether upgrading or corrective, is an essential
process in the life cycle, as it keeps the software updated as regards
to rapid technological development, regulatory development and the new
requirements of the administration.

Furthermore, during maintenance, product software updates fall within
the scope of Article 69 of the CAD and must therefore be available for
reuse. This section describes the maintenance procedure that we
recommend to easily allow for the reuse of these improvements.

Ownership of the code developed during maintenance
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As already discussed in `1.5 Ownership <#_Toc535583316>`__, the
administration must assume full ownership of software developed from
scratch, including any portion developed during a maintenance contract.
Please refer to the aforementioned section for further information.

Release of modifications under open licence
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To release modifications to software, it is not possible to use the
process previously described in `3.7.1 Releasing new software under open
licence <#_Toc535583359>`__; in fact, this process, regardless of the
extent of the modification, would create a second source code repository
separate from the original, creating high costs for any administration
that, having reused the original software, hopes to continue to benefit
from its ongoing development.

The proper and cheaper way (both for the owner administration, and for
those who hope to reuse the software in the future) to maintain software
under open licence is to adopt a **specific development process** in
which every individual change is carried out directly in the original
repository containing the software, providing immediate evidence of the
change that has occurred.

Furthermore, it is essential to communicate that the software is in the
maintenance phase (by entering this information during the software
registration in Developers Italia), so that other administrations can
take this into account in the comparative assessment phase.

The entire process is described in technical detail in `Annex B: Guide
to maintaining <#_bookmark77>`__\ `open source
software <#_bookmark77>`__. In the case of procurement, the
administration is required to **include the guide among the tender
technical documents**, for example as an annex to the technical
specifications, so that suppliers have immediate evidence of the process
required.

Support for reusing administrations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Even if there is no guarantee or technical or training support
obligation on the part of the owner administration towards
administrations that reuse the software, where the software is subject
to upgrading maintenance, it is essential that the internal resources or
companies in charge of such maintenance provide basic support to those
who report specific issues, or who wish to make (at their own expense)
changes to the software.

In fact, the reuse model, allows for multiple administrations to invest
in the same software, each with its own budget, therefore incrementally
adding to the value of the original software. However, for this process
to work correctly, as a minimum, a technical coordination process
between the public administration that maintains the software and the
administration that intends to modify it is desirable. Furthermore, this
provides an opportunity to share development plans and therefore
investments between multiple administrations as regards the same
software, with savings for public financing.

This process of supporting software modifications is also detailed in
the same guide `Annex B: Guide <#_bookmark77>`__\ `to maintaining open
source software <#_bookmark77>`__.

Software not yet released under open licence
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If the administration initiates a process of maintenance for software
that it already owns, but for which it has not yet released under an
open licence, adding its initial release to the maintenance contract
must be considered, because of the lower cost that is normally incurred
compared to carrying it out separately.
