Releasing existing *software* under open licence
-----------------------------------------------

Article 69(1) reads as follows:

'Public administrations that are owners of solutions and computer
programs made to the specifications of the public client, have the
obligation to make the relevant source code available, complete with
documentation and released in a public repository under an open licence,
for use free of charge for other public administrations or for legal
entities wishing to adapt them to their own requirements, except when
there are ‘justified reasons of public order and safety, national
defence and electoral consultations’.

The obligations mentioned here refer to the entire software range on
which the rights of an administration are emphasised, with the
consequence that, regardless of the requirement to comply with these
obligations when concluding new contracts, each administration is
required to implement them promptly, **including with reference to the
existing software where they own the relevant intellectual and
industrial property rights (as indicated in**
`1.5 <#_Toc535583316>`__\ `Ownership <#_Toc535583316>`__).

Implementing these obligations on existing software is an essential
aspect of maximising the effectiveness of the provision in question and,
more generally, of the good practice of reuse, since it allows other
administrations to benefit without delay from the opportunities offered
by reuse, avoiding the risk that they will have to reacquire solutions
already belonging to the public information estate and that, therefore,
could be used without generating any additional cost for the community.

Therefore the administration **must create an inventory of the
software** that is already in its possession in order to verify its
ownership, and if so proceed to release under open licence.

Given the rapid obsolescence of digital technologies and the importance
of encouraging the reuse of available solutions, software that has not
been in use by the administration for more than 5 years is deemed to be
excluded from the release obligation, with reference to the date of
publication of these guidelines.

Detailed specifications on how to implement the release are contained in
`Annex A: Guide to publishing <#_bookmark65>`__\ `software as open
source <#_bookmark65>`__. If the administration does not have the
necessary resources to align the document with the standards set out in
the guide, the administration must in any case immediately proceed with
the release of what it possesses in its current state, it being
understood that the presence of documentation is an essential
requirement set out in regulations and it will therefore be necessary to
proceed with the completion and alignment of the documentation as soon
as possible in order to consider the obligation completed.
