Total Cost of Ownership (TCO)
-----------------------------------

Economic comparative assessments are carried out using
economic/financial instruments such as TCO (Total Cost of Ownership),
which represents the overall cost of an asset during its life cycle. TCO
takes into account both direct and indirect costs, representing the
recommended method for measuring total costs (through the identification
of all expenses, in clear and easily measurable terms), as well as for
carrying out the above comparative assessment during phase 3.

To correctly implement TCO, the costs for the entire life cycle of the
software must be calculated and not only those required for its
acquisition, such as for example:

-  Costs for the acquisition of hardware and proprietary software
   licences required for commissioning the software being acquired;

-  Costs for software customisation;

-  Maintenance costs (corrective and upgrading);

-  Personnel training costs;

-  Costs of data migration from previous solutions.

In these guidelines, it has been suggested to use TCO in two different
phases: during macro-phase 2 (as a tool to estimate the cost of
acquiring open source software), and during macro-phase 3 (as a tool to
assist in choosing between a custom-built creation and the acquisition
of proprietary software).

In order to comply with these guidelines, the administration is
therefore required to make an estimate of the costs according to the
model outlined here during the comparative analysis phase, while always
taking account of the overall life cycle. The accuracy of this analysis
is especially important when the required acquisition is substantial.

Providing TCO calculation models for the requirements of administrations
goes beyond the objectives of these guidelines, as such requirements are
different. AgID may, in the future, publish optional ready-to-use models
within the Developers Italia platform.
